Chaco PV overview document
================

<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# Introduction

Sustainability is one of Chaco’s core values. With ample south-facing
roof-space it makes sense to put up solar panels. It’s much more
economical to install PV at build time rather than retrofitting panels,
so it makes sense to plan a PV installation into Chaco’s design at the
earliest possible stage.

The south-facing roof-space available to Chaco is illustrated below:

![](sitemap-aerial.png)<!-- -->

# How many panels can fit?

Based on architectural drawings, the south facing roof-space available
was estimated. The first stage was to digitise the pdfs into simple
block representations of the buildings and highlight south-facing roofs,
as illustrated in the figure below.

This was georectified and digitised in QGIS, resulting in the following
data, which has been made available as open data, and can be view in an
interactive map [here](http://rpubs.com/RobinLovelace/497201):

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)<!-- -->

The total maximum area available, for the terrace, common house, the
shed (the least certain of the roofs for panels) and the total roof
area, respectively, was calculated as follows:

    #> Units: [m^2]
    #> [1] 389  87  31
    #> 507.1707 [m^2]

Of course, these values cannot be achieved in practice: the entire 390
m<sup>2</sup> of space available on the terrace roof, for example,
cannot be entirely overtaken by panels\!

The initial spec document\[1\] included provision for 127 1600x980mm
panels as follow:

  - 14 \* 6 panel installations on the 14 un-shaded roofs of the terrace
  - 4 \* 4 panel installations on the remaining 4 ‘type C’ terrace roofs
    that will receive some shading
  - 27 panels on the common house

Assuming a per panel output of 270 W, this would mean Chaco could
generate 34 KWp in full sunshine.

Subsequent analysis\[2\], based on the outdated assumption of
symmetrical terrace roof side profiles, suggested there may be room for
178 panels:

  - 74 panels on the East wing of the terrace, with 2 stacked in
    portrait orientation per unit of roof width (this stacking alignment
    is not possible, as shown in the sketch below)
  - 74 panels on the West wing of the terrace
  - 30 panels on the common house roof (this is the number assumed in
    the sketch below)

We assume the panels will be 1650x991mm (Manni et al. 2017). Given that
the roof has an elevation of 35 degrees, such panels would have a
horizontal footprint of 1619x991mm. In the original scenario, they would
cover 204 m<sup>2</sup>, less than half of the total available space
under optimistic assumptions.

The assumption about panel size, plus use of digitising tools in QGIS,
allows the panel location to envisioned. The figure below shows two ways
of aligning the panels: stacked as portrait or landscape. The portrait
way is a squeeze: the roof is just over 3.3 m long in the horizontal
access; two panels stacked in portrait formation are just over 3.2 m,
leaving only a few cm clearance, which may be insufficient.

![Portrait and landscape stacking. The two panels on the bottom left
show the impact of the panels being at 35 degrees in each alignment:
relatively minor.](closeup3.png)

The landscape stacking style leaves more room all round and 3 panels
every ~2m.

The straight sections of the east and west wings are 41 m, leaving room
for 24 sets of three on each, 120 panels in total. The south facing
roofs on the curve are around 6.7 m at the smallest point, suggesting
that there is enough room for 9 panels each (36 in total, as there are 4
curved roof sections). These calculations suggest there is enough room
for 156 panels on the terrace, not accounting for the complicating
factors of shaded panels (see the darker red areas in the figure above)
or the slightly larger roof space on 4 of the houses.

The south facing roof on the common house is ~17.5 m long and just over
5 m wide. It may be possible to fit three panels in portrait formation
on the common house roof, allowing 3 \* 16 = 48 panels on the common
house roof. However, 30 panels in 2 by 15 formation would leave more
room, and we will assume this number (30 panels) will be installed on
the common house roof henceforth.

As a sanity check, a rough sketch representing this many panels on Chaco
is provided below.

![](panels-draw.png)<!-- -->

Note that in the sketch the panels are packed tightly from the bottom to
the top of the roof across the terrace. The 60 East wing panels are also
packed tightly in the along the width of the roof. This is not
realistic, especially in the shaded section. The West wing shows panels
arranged in groups of 12. This is also not realistic. PV installers
should design better, and much more accurate panel layout plans.

**Overall, simplistic calculations based on optimistic assumptions about
stacking and shading suggest that Chaco could have room for 186 panels
(50 KWp assuming no shading of 270 W modules).**

## Sensitivity analysis

The analysis presented in the previous section ignores many things. The
number of panels that will fit is sensitive to complicating factors
around the interfaces between roofs of different heights in the terrace;
the assumption that panels can be packed tight on the terrace house
roof; and that panels go on the curved roof. So far it ignores the shed,
which could fit around 12 (4x3) extra panels, and could be a place to
extend the PV capacity of Chaco in the future, perhaps linked to EV
charging. But larger changes may include the distance needed between
panels and whether or not to put any panels on the curved roof space (4
x 3 panel widths) or shaded sections (~4 x 2 panel widths), which could
remove 60 panels, reducing the installed capacity by a around third (to
34 kWp under the first scenario).

If only 2 panels could fit per unit of horizontal roof-space, this would
also substantially reduce the installed capacity by the installed number
of panel in the east-west dimension (52 in the sketch) to 134 panels (35
kWp, assuming panels go on the curved and shaded roof sections).

Other considerations not covered here may increase or decrease Chaco’s
the capacity of PV that installed in Chaco; this document is not
definitive. It could form a basis of more accurate and well-informed
assessments of Chaco’s solar PV potential and an optimal design for a PV
installation. **An installer with experience of designing and
implementing community scale PV installations is recommended to iterate
on these designs based on accurate CAD representations of Chaco’s roof
space.**

## Scenarios of installed capacity

To summarise the above discussion, different scenarios of installed
number of panels and power outputs, assuming that 30 go on the common
house and per panel output of 270 Wp, are:

``` r
s1 = 20 * 3 * 2 + 3 * 3 * 4 + n_common_house 
s2 = 16 * 3 * 2 + 3 * 3 * 4 + n_common_house 
s3 = 20 * 3 * 2 + n_common_house 
s4 = 16 * 3 * 2 + n_common_house 
s5 = 20 * 2 * 2 + 3 * 2 * 4 + n_common_house 
s6 = 16 * 2 * 2 + 3 * 2 * 4 + n_common_house 
s7 = 20 * 2 * 2 + n_common_house 
s8 = 16 * 2 * 2 + n_common_house 
```

    #> s1: 50.22 kWp s2: 43.74 kWp s3: 40.5 kWp s4: 34.02 kWp s5: 36.18 kWp s6: 31.86 kWp s7: 29.7 kWp s8: 25.38 kWp

  - S1: **186 panels**. This involves 3-deep landscape stacking on the
    terrace, panels on the curved sections, panels in the shaded areas.
  - S2: **162 panels**. This involves 3-deep landscape stacking on the
    terrace, panels on the curved sections, but no panels in the shaded
    areas, meaning 2x4x3 (24) fewer panels
  - S3: **150 panels**. This involves 3-deep landscape stacking on the
    terrace, no panels on the curved sections meaning 3x4x3 (36) fewer
    panels, panel in the shaded areas
  - S4: **126 panels**. This involves 3-deep landscape stacking on the
    terrace, no panels on the curved sections meaning 3x4x3 (36) fewer
    panels, no panels in the shaded areas, meaning 2x4x3 (24) fewer
    panels
  - S5: **134 panels**. This involves 2-deep landscape stacking on the
    terrace, panels on the curved sections, panels in the shaded areas
  - S6: **118 panels**. This involves 2-deep landscape stacking on the
    terrace, panels on the curved sections, no panels in the shaded
    areas
  - S7: **110 panels**. This involves 2-deep landscape stacking on the
    terrace, no panels on the curved sections, panels in the shaded
    areas
  - S8: **94 panels** (25 kWp under panel output assumptions). This
    involves 2-deep landscape stacking on the terrace, no panels on the
    curved sections, no panels in the shaded areas

# Energy generation

Having high installed capacity, measured in kWp, does not gurarntee high
energy generation. Based on local weather conditions, the system can be
expected to generate 884 kWh/kWp.\[2\] This would result in an output of
around 44,000 kWh/yr under scenario 1. Monthly generation would be
expected to show a strong seasonal pattern, approximating the energy
generation per month shown in the figure below.

![](monthly-energy.png)<!-- -->

**The PV system plan should include forecasts of monthly generation,
allowing post-installation performance evaluation.**

# Other considerations

In addition to the surface area available and the number of ~1.6x1m
panels that could be installed, explored in the previous section, there
are other considerations that could increase or decrease the performance
of the panels, some of which are outlined below.

## Panel output and degredation

Modules rated at 270 W have been assumed. However, higher rated panels
are available, including:

  - Canadian Solar CS6K-275M: 275 W
  - Hanwha Q-Cells Q.Plus BFR-G4.1: 280 W Hanwha Q.Peak BLK G4.1: 290 W
  - Panasonic LG320N1K-A5: 320 W (this is a 1686x1016 unit)

In outdoor tests, the performance of each panel was found to degrade at
different rates (Stein et al. 2018). **Expected lifespan and performance
degredation rates should be included in estimates of energy
generation.**

## Aggregation of power

For economies of scale and electricity purchase, electricity will be
supplied by a private wire into a central control board. It makes sense
for the PV power to supply this central supply, rather than individual
houses.

## Inverters

Few large inverters are cheaper and more effective than many small ones
for a given power rating. This raises the question: how many inverters
should be supplied. One scenario would involve 3 inverters, accounting
for the 3 main areas of power generation outlined above:

  - One ~20kW inverter for the west wing
  - One ~20kW inverter for the east wing
  - One ~10kW inverter for the common house

It may also make sense to install separate inverters for curved
sections. Inverter configuration will be an important factor in overall
performance.

Inverter location must also be decided. Options could include placement
in attic space, under the stairs and in dedicated storage units outside
the thermal envelope.

## Financing

One option explored is to finance the PV installation via Leeds
Community Energy (LCE), a community benefit company. This could involve
LCE owning the panels and leasing them to Chaco until the investment is
paid back.

# References

<div id="refs" class="references">

<div id="ref-manni_architectural_2017">

Manni, Mattia, Raffaele Tecce, Gianluca Cavalaglio, Valentina Coccia,
Andrea Nicolini, and Alessandro Petrozzi. 2017. “Architectural and
Energy Refurbishment of the Headquarter of the University of Teramo.”
*Energy Procedia*, ATI 2017 - 72nd Conference of the Italian Thermal
Machines Engineering Association, 126 (September): 565–72.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.08.290>.

</div>

<div id="ref-stein_pv_2018">

Stein, Joshua S., Charles Robinson, Bruce King, Chris Deline, Steve
Rummel, and Bill Sekulic. 2018. “PV Lifetime Project: Measuring PV
Module PerformanceDegradation: 2018 Indoor Flash TestingResults.” In
*2018 IEEE 7th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion
(WCPEC) (A Joint Conference of 45th IEEE PVSC, 28th PVSEC & 34th EU
PVSEC)*, 0771–77. Waikoloa Village, HI: IEEE.
<https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2018.8547397>.

</div>

</div>

1.   M\&E performance specification(revA)

2.   Source:
    [Analysis](https://www.dropbox.com/s/v66fi3ww2puez7h/ChapelTownHousing%20PVSOL%20v2.pdf?dl=0)
    by community scale PV specialists Jojo Solar.
